The ADCIRC Developers Guide
===========================

:Author: Jason Fleming
:Email:  <jason.fleming@seahorsecoastal.com>

Introduction
------------

This document describes how to build ADCIRC and ADCIRC+SWAN, as well 
as the guidelines that ADCIRC developers should use when developing 
new code for ADCIRC and its related utilities. It also presents a 
short tutorial for Subversion (svn), the version control software 
that we use to coordinate development and ease the task of merging 
in new features.

Build It
--------

This section contains details for building ADCIRC executables and
describes the directories and files related to the build process.
For a more complete description of the files and directories that 
are included with the ADCIRC source code, see the official ADCIRC
documentation on adcirc.org:

 http://adcirc.org/home/documentation/generic-adcirc-compile-time-operations/

The ADCIRC source tree contains a directory called 'work' where the 
ADCIRC and ADCIRC+SWAN executables are built. This directory contains
the following files:

.Definitions
'config.guess'::
    A shell script that is called automatically by make during the
    build process to guess the hardware and operating system that
    are being used in the build process. You can execute this 
    shell script yourself on the command line to see what it guesses
    and confirm that it is guessing correctly. The resulting platform
    guess is then used automatically in the 'cmplrflags.mk' file.
'cmplrflags.mk'::
    Contains sets of compiler flags that are appropriate for various 
    platforms. The build process uses the output from 'config.guess' 
    to select the appropriate set of compiler flags. In the past, in 
    the days of many varieties of proprietary unix, the hardware 
    type and operating system type were sufficient to determine 
    which compiler flags to select. Now that most installations of 
    ADCIRC are on linux, it is often necessary to provide additional 
    hints about which set of compiler flags to use, and these 
    additional hints are provided on the command line when make is 
    executed, as described below.
'makefile'::
    The makefile contains instructions for building 'adcirc', 
    'padcirc', 'padcswan' (if the SWAN source code is also present),
    'adcprep', 'adcpost', 'hstime', and 'aswip' on linux or unix.

When building ADCIRC for the first time on a new (to me) platform, I 
normally begin by going to the ADCIRC 'work' directory 

 cd work

and running 'config.guess' manually to see what it guesses about the 
platform architecture. 

 ./config.guess

Then I open up the 'cmplrflags.mk' file, to see if the relevant 
platform and/or compiler is defined in the file, and if it is, how 
it is triggered on the make command line with the +compiler=+ 
notation.  

I also test the availability of the compilers that I will be using 
by executing the +which+ command. For example, if I'm using the 
Intel compilers, I'll type +which ifort+. If I'll be running ADCIRC 
in parallel, I'd also try +which icc+ and +which mpif90+ to make 
sure they're all available. If they're not, I take it up with my 
local sysadmin.

Looking in the 'cmplrflags.mk', I would find (for example) that I 
can use a set of Intel-appropriate compiler flags by setting 
+compiler=intel+ on the make command line. As a result, my first 
tentative step in building all the ADCIRC executables would be

 make adcirc compiler=intel
 
Assuming that this completes successfully, I would try

 make padcirc compiler=intel
 
Now that padcirc has been built successfully, the parallelization 
modules used by parallel SWAN are available (they share the same 
libraries). In other words, *the 'padcswan' build depends on the 
'padcirc' build*, so 'padcirc' must be built before 'padcswan'. If 
you'd like to build ADCIRC+SWAN, it is time to switch to the SWAN 
subdirectory. 

 cd ../swan

SWAN has a completely separate build system, since it is normally a 
completely separate code. But the SWAN build system must solve the 
same problems as the ADCIRC build system, that is, detecting the 
nature of the underlying platform and suggesting an appropriate set 
of compiler flags.

The SWAN build system has a perl script called 'platform.pl' that 
performs much the same function as 'config.guess' does for ADCIRC. 
The difference is that 'plaform.pl' picks the compiler flags and 
writes them to a file called 'macros.inc' for use during the build 
process. 

Several sets of 'macros.inc' files are already available in the 
ADCIRC source code for use with certain platforms; type +ls macros*+
to see the currently available choices. To write a set of compiler
flags for your platform, type

 perl ./platform.pl
 
You may want to have a look at the resulting 'macros.inc' file to be 
sure that it represents the compiler you're using. If it looks ok, 
the next step is to create a test build of 'punswan'. You won't 
actually use 'punswan'; in fact, you'll completely delete it, even 
if it builds successfully. You're just trying to build it to test 
the validity of your compiler flags.

 make punswan
 
Once 'punswan' builds successfully, go ahead and get rid of it as 
well as any object files that were built along the way with

 make clobber
 
Now you're ready to switch back to the work subdirectory and build 
'padcswan', if you're interested in that:

 cd ../work
 make padcswan compiler=intel
 
Once 'padcswan' has been built successfully, you can build 
'adcprep', the program that prepares your input files for a parallel 
run. If you also plan to run ADCIRC+SWAN in parallel, then add the 
+SWAN=enable+ string to the make command line, as follows:

 make adcprep compiler=intel SWAN=enable
 
You'll see the invokation of your C compiler during the build 
process for 'adcprep', since 'adcprep' uses the metis library (which 
is written in C) to perform domain decomposition. 

Once you've successfully built 'adcprep', the main set of 
executables is complete. However, there are a couple utility 
programs you may like to build as well. The first of these is a very 
small program called 'hstime' whose only purpose is to read the time 
in seconds from an ADCIRC hotstart file and write it out to the 
console window. Use a command like 'make hstime compiler=intel' to 
build this utility.

The final executable that you may like to build is 'aswip', the 
Asymmetric Wind Input Preprocessor. This utility program is required 
for the use of an asymmetric vortex model for tropical cyclones in 
ADCIRC. One wrinkle for this program is that it calls many 
subroutines inside ADCIRC, therefore *there is a dependency of 
'aswip' on 'adcirc'*, meaning that 'adcirc' executable must be built 
first in order for 'aswip' to be built successfully. It is built
analogously with the other ADCIRC executables, with a command like 
'make aswip compiler=intel'.

Another issue with the building of 'aswip' is that it is built 
inside the same directory as 'adcirc', and both programs have a 
"main" program section inside them, creating a conflict. Therefore, 
in order to rebuild 'adcirc' after 'aswip' has been built, 'aswip' 
its object file must be deleted first, to avoid a build error when 
'adcirc' is rebuilt.

All of the above instructions will build the ADCIRC executables 
without support for NetCDF input or output. This was done 
intentionally, to simplify the build process and avoid complications 
resulting from the vagaries of building with NetCDF. 

On the other hand, the use of NetCDF is recommended as a result of 
the many advantages of NetCDF files. ADCIRC actually supports the 
use of three different NetCDF capabilities: NetCDF3, NetCDF4 
(classic model), and NetCDF4 with internal compression. 

If you've already built all the executables without NetCDF, its 
necessary to get rid of them so that you can build with NetCDF.

 make clobber

To enable compilation with NetCDF3, the command line listed at the 
beginning of these instructions for building ADCIRC would be 
modified as follows:

 make adcirc compiler=intel NETCDF=enable NETCDFHOME=/usr
 
with the NETCDFHOME variable indicating the directory where NetCDF 
was installed. The ADCIRC build system expects this directory to 
contain +include/netcdf.inc+. 

If NetCDF4 without internal compression is installed on your 
platform, the above would change to the following:

 make adcirc compiler=intel NETCDF=enable NETCDFHOME=/usr NETCDF4=enable
 
in which case the directory specified in the NETCDFHOME variable 
would also be expected to contain the +include/netcdf.mod+ Fortran 
module file. 

Finally, if your NetCDF4 installation supports internal compression 
(only introduced in NetCDF4 version 4.1), and you want ADCIRC to 
automatically make use of internal compression, change the above 
command line as follows:

 make adcirc compiler=intel NETCDF=enable NETCDFHOME=/usr NETCDF4=enable
 NETCDF4_COMPRESSION=enable
 
These changes in the make command line must be made for the build of 
each of the ADCIRC executables so that they are all consistent. In order
to encapsulate the paths and other settings that are specific to 
certain machines, the cmplrflags.mk file uses the MACHINENAME variable
that can be set on the make command line. This variable can be used if
the settings for that machine have already been committed to the 
cmplrflags.mk:

 make adcirc compiler=intel NETCDF=enable NETCDF4=enable 
 NETCDF4_COMPRESSION=enable MACHINENAME=hatteras

For example, on many up-to-date netcdf4 installations, the -lnetcdff library
is required for successful compilation. This flag can be added to the 
MACHINENAME section of the cmplrflags.mk, thus automatically including
it when compiling with netcdf. 

In general, building ADCIRC with NetCDF support is tedious and 
usually requires several rounds of emails to local sysadmins to 
determine the right combination of compiler flags and options, 
because they vary siginificantly from platform to platform. Have a 
look at the NetCDF-related compiler flags in 'cmplrflags.mk' for 
ideas to get you started.

Development Strategy
--------------------

The ADCIRC development strategy consists of the maintenance of two 
separate versions at any given time: the stable version and the 
development version. The stable version only receives bug fixes, 
while the development version receives bug fixes as well as new 
features. 

At some point, the development version becomes stable. At that time, 
a stable branch is created from it, and then new features are added 
to the previosly stable code, creating a new development version. At 
that time, the major version number will be incremented, e.g., 
stable v48.xx will become the next development version as v49.00.

The minor version number is changed each time there is a change in 
the code and the modified code is committed back to the repository. 
Details of the implementation of this strategy with Subversion are 
provided in the section entitled "Subversion".

Coding Standards
----------------

ADCIRC has had many individual contributors and has received code 
accretions over many years. A set of uniform coding standards has 
not been defined, and as a result, ADCIRC contains many different 
styles of Fortran. This section provides a set of style guidelines 
for contributing code to ADCIRC.

The Basics
~~~~~~~~~~

* IMPLICIT NONE at the beginning of each subroutine.
* Fixed form, never exceeding the 72 column limit, even for comment 
lines.
* When adding code to an existing subroutine, make the new code 
match the style of the surrounding code, even if you'd prefer 
another style.


Maintainability
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When adding code that will be used in slightly different ways in 
different contexts, make it a subroutine, rather than cutting and 
pasting several times and making small changes to each 
cut-and-pasted section. Although it is faster to write code with 
cut-and-paste, the resulting code is harder to maintain, since each 
cut-and-pasted section will have to be modified individually later. 
Also, it is easier to make mistakes when working with cut-and-pasted 
code.

Rick has expressed a desire for greater modularity ... particularly 
with the number of variables in the global module. When adding a 
major new feature, please consider the modularity of the data it 
requires. In other words, if new variables can be made private to a 
particular module rather than global, please do so.

Release Process
---------------

The release process informal, but generally includes the following 
steps:

* Set and stick to a list of new features as the goal for the new 
release.
* Have a consensus among ADCIRC developers that the goal has been 
achieved.
* Run tests that cover the new features as well as making sure old 
features still work.
* Fix issues revealed by failed tests.
* Distribute the release candidate code to collaborative users to 
make sure their runs perform as expected on the new code.
* Fix issues revealed by user dismay.
* Update the docs to reflect the changes. If input files or file 
formats have changed, produce release notes to highlight the changes.
* Publicly announce, release, and brag about a shiny new version of 
ADCIRC.

These tests are often referred to as "regression tests," i.e., a 
means to detect a regression in correctness or functionality due to 
changes in the code. A regression test suite can be built up pretty 
easily.  There are a number of small test cases on adcirc.org, so 
the initial set of tests should consist of those. We may also want 
to differentiate between tests for correctness and tests for 
functionality. The former is making sure you're getting the expected 
model results and the latter is making sure that nothing is broken 
(i.e., adcprep, i/o, message passing, etc).

The test suite gets built up based on different purposes.  One may 
want to exercise more options and more cases, but it is also 
important to test for known bugs that might have been reintroduced.  
In otherwords, once a bug is discovered and fixed, a test should be 
created specifically for that bug to make sure it doesn't appear 
again.

And lastly, a small test suite should be included with each 
distribution and a more comprehensive should be created that runs 
during development and before a release. A step in this direction 
has been made using ant in the autotest directory. 

Appendix A: This Document
-------------------------

This document was prepared from the text file ADCIRCDevGuide.txt 
using software called asciidoc (http://www.methods.co.nz/asciidoc/). 
The document can be formatted as an html page with the command 

   asciidoc -a toc2 ADCIRCDevGuide.txt

or formatted as a pdf with the command

   a2x --format=pdf -a toc2 ADCIRCDevGuide.txt  


ifdef::backend-docbook[]
Index
-----
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
The index is normally left completely empty, it's contents being
generated automatically by the DocBook toolchain.
////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////////
endif::backend-docbook[]
